---
title: "Notes from “The Wealth of Nations”"
description: "Chapter VIII — OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR"
date: "2023-05-13T11:44:48.640Z"
categories: []
published: false
---

  

### Chapter VIII — OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR

> What are the common wages of labour, depends everywhere upon the contract usually made between those two parties, whose interests are by no means the same. The workmen desire to get as much, the masters to give as little, as possible. The former are disposed to combine in order to raise, the latter in order to lower, the wages of labour.

> It is not… difficult to foresee which of the two parties must… have the advantage in the dispute, and **_force_** the other into a compliance with their terms. **The masters**, being fewer in number, **can combine much more easily**: and the law, besides, authorises, or at least does not prohibit, their combinations, while it prohibits those of the workmen. **We have no acts of parliament against combining to lower the price of work, but many against combining to raise it**. In all such disputes, **the masters can hold out much longer**. A landlord, a farmer, a master manufacturer, or merchant, though they did not employ a single workman, **could generally live a year or two upon the stocks**, which they have already acquired. **Many workmen could not subsist a week, few could subsist a month, and scarce any a year, without employment**. In the long run, the workman may be as necessary to his master as his master is to him; **but the necessity is not so immediate.**

> **We rarely hear**, it has been said, **of the combinations of masters, though frequently of those of workmen. But whoever imagines… that masters rarely combine, is as ignorant of the world as of the subject**. Masters are always and everywhere in a sort of tacit, but constant and uniform, combination, not to raise the wages of labour above their actual rate. To violate this combination is everywhere a most unpopular action, and a sort of reproach to a master among his neighbours and equals. We seldom, indeed, hear of this combination, because it is the usual, and, one may say, the natural state of things, which nobody ever hears of. **Masters**, too, sometimes **enter into particular combinations to sink the wages of labour even below this rate. These are always conducted with the utmost silence and secrecy till the moment of execution**; and when the workmen yield, as they sometimes do without resistance, though severely felt by them, they are never heard of by other people. Such combinations, however, are frequently resisted by a contrary defensive combination of the workmen, who sometimes, too, without any provocation of this kind, combine, of their own accord, to raise the price of their labour. Their usual pretences are, sometimes the high price of provisions, sometimes the great profit which their masters make by their work. **But whether their combinations \[of the workers\] be offensive or defensive, they are always abundantly heard of**. In order to bring the point to a speedy decision, they have always recourse to the loudest clamour, and sometimes to the most shocking violence and outrage. **They are desperate, and act with the folly and extravagance of desperate men, who must either starve, or frighten their masters into an immediate compliance with their demands.** **The masters**, upon these occasions, are just as clamorous upon the other side, and **never cease to call aloud for the assistance of the civil magistrate, and the rigorous execution of those laws which have been enacted with so much severity against the combination of servants, labourers, and journeymen.** The workmen, accordingly, very seldom derive any advantage from the violence of those tumultuous combinations, which, partly from the interposition of the civil magistrate, partly from the superior steadiness of the masters, partly from the necessity which the greater part of the workmen are under of submitting for the sake of present subsistence, generally end in nothing but the punishment or ruin of the ringleaders.

#### Summary of ☝️

Adam Smith foreshadows all caricatures of Karl Marx (whom I’ve never read). Essentially, Smith describes the conflict between laborers and owners (“masters”). Smith comes strongly on the side of the laborers insofar as advantages go. “It is not… difficult to foresee” who between the “parties” has “the advantage in the dispute”, Smith points out. There are fewer “masters” wo they “**can combine much more easily**”. Furthermore, the law says nothing about employers colluding but “it prohibits those of the workmen”. Also, being richer, “the masters can hold out much longer” and can “generally live a year or two” just on their wealth but ordinary laborers cannot “subsist a week” and hardly can can survive “a month… without employment”. While it’s true that both parties need one another, “in the long run” “the necessity is not so immediate”.

We don’t often hear about the owner class combining to depress wages but “frequently of… workmen. But whoever imagines… that masters rarely combine, is as ignorant of the world as of the subject”. When laborers strike out, “sometimes to the most shocking violence and outrage. They are desperate, and act with the folly and extravagance of desperate men, who must either starve, or frighten their masters into an immediate compliance with their demands”.

> in a country where the funds destined for the maintenance of labour were sensibly decaying. Every year the demand for servants and labourers would, in all the different classes of employments, be less than it had been the year before. Many who had been bred in the superior classes, not being able to find employment in their own business, would be glad to seek it in the lowest. The lowest class being not only overstocked with its own workmen, but with the overflowings of all the other classes, the competition for employment would be so great in it, as to reduce the wages of labour to the most miserable and scanty subsistence of the labourer. Many would not be able to find employment even upon these hard terms, but would either starve, or be driven to seek a subsistence, either by begging, or by the perpetration perhaps, of the greatest enormities. Want, famine, and mortality, would immediately prevail in that class, and from thence extend themselves to all the superior classes, till the number of inhabitants in the country was reduced to what could easily be maintained by the revenue and stock which remained in it, and which had escaped either the tyranny or calamity which had destroyed the rest. This, perhaps, is nearly the present state of Bengal, and of some other of the English settlements in the East Indies. In a fertile country, which had before been much depopulated, where subsistence, consequently, should not be very difficult, and where, notwithstanding, three or four hundred thousand people die of hunger in one year, we may be assured that the funds destined for the maintenance of the labouring poor are fast decaying. **The difference between** the genius of **the British constitution**, which protects and governs North America, **and that of the mercantile company** which oppresses and domineers in the East Indies, **cannot**, perhaps, **be better illustrated** than by the different state of those countries.

#### Summary of ☝️

The consequence of a continual drop in investment in servants and other laborers will be a vicious cycle where less and less employment is to be had. This will lead to “want, famine, and mortality” spreading eventually even to “the superior classes”. “This, perhaps, is nearly the present state of Bengal” and other “English settlements in the East Indies”. “\[A\] fertile country” like Bengal has been “much depopulated” and now “three or four hundred thousand people die of hunger in one year”.

> A labourer, it may be said, indeed, ought to save part of his summer wages, in order to defray his winter expense; and that, through the whole year, they do not exceed what is necessary to maintain his family through the whole year. A slave, however, or one absolutely dependent on us for immediate subsistence, would not be treated in this manner. His daily subsistence would be proportioned to his daily necessities.

> …

> The wear and tear of a slave, it has been said, is at the expense of his master; but that of a free servant is at his own expense.

A wage laborer has a harder time than a slave. The laborer has to save for winter when his wages drop. The slave doesn’t have to worry about this because his owner handles it.

> It is not because one man keeps a coach, while his neighbour walks a-foot, that the one is rich, and the other poor; but because the one is rich, he keeps a coach, and because the other is poor, he walks a-foot.

What it says.
