---
title: "Enumerating the Rationals… again"
description: "In an earlier post, I solved a puzzle and, in the process, enumerated all the rational numbers. That solution worked and was correct…"
date: "2023-05-13T11:44:42.492Z"
categories: []
published: false
---

In an earlier post, I solved a puzzle and, in the process, [enumerated all the rational numbers](https://medium.com/galileo-onwards/catch-a-spy-to-enumerate-all-rational-numbers-c3ceb35e87cb). That solution worked and was correct. However, there’s a more efficient way to enumerate all the rational numbers. That’s what this post discusses.

Recently, I came across the _Stern-Brocot binary tree_. It’s a tree that has a one to one correspondence with all the rational numbers, ie, every number generated by the tree appears once _and only once_ to match with the rational numbers. Thus, where my solution generated duplicate numbers such as ⅛ and 2/16 (and 3/24 and…), this doesn’t happen in the _Stern-Brocot tree_. The rational numbers are generated once and only once. This is good news is if we’re looking for the most efficient representation of all the Rational numbers. It’s bad news if you’re trying to catch a spy like I was in the earlier post.

Great, what _is_ the Stern-Brocot tree? It is a binary tree that … TK It was “discovered independently by Moris Stern, a German mathematician, and Achille Brocot, a French clockmaker”¹.

The tree’s generation is one only a mathematician could’ve come up with. It says: start with 0 and ∞. Pick a number in between them, 1, as it happens. Now pick a number between two adjacent numbers: 0 and 1. Next pick a number between 1 and ∞. Repeat this procedure infinitely.

You start with the numbers (0/1) and (1/0). You then pick the number in between they by computing (0+1)/(1+0) = (1/1). This is step one. In step two, you compute two numbers: the first between (0/1) and (1/1), and the second between (1/1) and (1/0). The computation proceeds in the same way: (0/1) and (1/1)≡(0+1)/(1+1)=(1/2); and (1/1) and (1/0)≡(1+1)/(1+0)=(2/1). Further steps are illustrated in the image below.
